---
layout: post
title: "Prisons"
hidden: true
---



The state Department of Corrections operates 37 prison facilities. It also maintains a small percentage of prisoners at contract facilities, such as county jails. In total, Wisconsin's prisoner population is 20,000 people (according to [this recent population report]). This only includes prisoners, not people in jail awaiting trial or serving misdemeanor sentences (I think?). From a 2019 demographic report](https://doc.wi.gov/DataResearch/DataAndReports/2019%20PIOC%20Profile.pdf), prisoners are about 95% male, with median age 39.

The DOC provides data for its facilities on a pretty comprehensive [Covid dashboard](https://doc.wi.gov/Pages/COVID19(Coronavirus)/COVID19TestingDashboard.aspx). Total numbers are summed up in the table below. 

If I am interpreting the numbers correctly[^Correctly], more than 50% of all prisoners have been infected. This is about twice an [estimated true infection rate in the general population](. Unlike in the general population, it seems unlikely that there is a large amount of undetected infections, since I think the DOC would usually test everyone in the prison once an outbreak began.


I was curious on the variation between different prisons, so I matched Covid numbers from this dashboard with prison populations to calculate a fraction infected for each facility. In the following map, I show a bubble at each facility's location. The outer bubble size is proportional to the prisoner population, and the inner bubble is proportional to the number of Covid cases. Each bubble's fill percentage, then, shows the infection percentage in that prison.

[Map]

---
[^Correctly]: The DOC Covid dashboard lists "Positive Tests", not cases, but specifies that this does not include retests, so I think it must be the same as individual cases. It is probable that not all the cases that occurred in an institution are currently residing there; some have been released (which is listed on the dashboard), and some may have been transferred (which is not listed). The number released is less than 2% of the total cases, however. And if cases have been transferred between facilities, that may affect the individual facilities' tallies but would not affect the total numbers.
