---
layout: post
title: "Variants"
hidden: true
---

One, two! One, two! And through and through
      The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
He left it dead, and with its head
      He went galumphing back.
“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
      Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”
      He chortled in his joy.
- Jabberwocky, Lewis Carrol[*](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/42916/jabberwocky)

This was my mood when the results of the Pfizer virus trial were announced. (The Jabberwock = Covid, obviously.) With two doses of vaccine, the monster is slain.


“Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
      The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
      The frumious Bandersnatch!”

The first important variant is B.1.1.7, which became dominant in the U.K. and is thought to be more transmissible and possibly more deadly than Covid Classic. The second is B.1.351, which emerged in South Africa and is thought to less affected by existing Covid immunity. This means that people who have already had Covid can be more easilty reinfected, and that the existing vaccines appear to be less effective (though still partially effective to a greater or lesser degree).
      
Clearly the Jubjub bird is B.1.1.7, since as a bird it travels more easily, and the Bandersnatch is B.1.351, "frumious" meaning "less susceptible to existing antibodies."
      

The [CDC has a page](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/transmission/variant.html) with information about the new variants, which also includes a third one, P.1.  So far B.1.1.7 is the larger concern. Since it is more transmissible, once introduced it should gradually out-spread Covid Classic. If B.1.351, in contrast, is not inherently more transmissible but is somewhat more able to reinfect those with immunity, this is not immediately as great an advantage. Once most people have some natural or vaccinated immunity, this variant will probably become the bigger concern. (But Moderna and other vaccine makers are preparing boosters for it.) 

The CDC also tracks [all known cases](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/transmission/variant-cases.html) in the United States by state. There are hundreds of known examples of B.1.1.7, but only a few of the others. California and Florida each have a few hundred known cases, and the other states only a smattering. Wisconsin has only had 2 known cases of B.1.1.7, and none of the others.

A [recent preprint]() estimated the prevalence of B.1.1.7 in the United States and how fast it is displacing Covid Classic. They found that as of ..., B.1.1.7 accounted for 2% of cases in United States, and its *share* of cases was growing at 7% per day, which implies that it is about 40% more transmissible than Covid Classic.




He took his vorpal sword in hand;
      Long time the manxome foe he sought—
So rested he by the Tumtum tree
      And stood awhile in thought.

And, as in uffish thought he stood,
      The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
      And burbled as it came!





’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.
